MSC3741: Revealing the useful login flows to clients after a soft logout (#3741)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3741-soft-logout-login-flows.md

[refresh token](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2918) expiring.

Currently, if a server were to offer multiple flows the client
[would be confused](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2853) and potentially show either
the wrong flow, or an unhelpful flow. When the server uses both password registration and
[SSO](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#sso-client-loginauthentication), it is generally
assumed by clients that the server is offering "Social Login" mechanisms as an optional way to skip
[User-Interactive Authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#user-interactive-authentication-api)
flows. In Element, this is shown as 3rd party login options alongside a regular password form.

This MSC aims to assist clients in showing a more helpful flow for the user. Specifically, it aims
to have the client tell the server who is re-authenticating and thus the server can offer *just*
the flows which are relevant for that user's account (eg: just the SSO provider they used, or just
password flows if they never used SSO to sign up).

## Proposal

> Quite simply, the client provides the now-expired access token to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quite simply, under this proposal the client should provide the now-expired access token to the
```

[`/login`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#login) endpoint - just as it would any
other request.

Currently servers (should) be checking to see if the provided access token is an appservice user,
for [appservice login](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#appservice-login), however

> under this new approach the server would need to add a check for past users too.

Reviewer: I'm a bit worried about this from the point-of-view of the server-side implementation. Basically it's adding yet another knob to the already-baroque login flow - in particular it needs to deal with a bunch of different login mechanisms, as well as tokens which expire due to soft-logout and tokens which have refresh tokens. Login really isn't a place where you want lots of conditionals and configuration-dependent flows.

More generally, I'm reluctant to spend more time tweaking the existing auth system instead of moving to an OAuth2 world.

Can we not solve the problem by replacing soft-logout with refresh tokens (MSC2918), which is something we need to do anyway?

Author: Refresh tokens cause soft logout, which is the problem at hand. When the token expires the user gets soft logged out, which makes the soft logout flow *a lot* more common, particularly on servers like matrix.org where it's not as tightly configured to handle an organization-only SSO (with no password auth) as we've seen with traditional usage of soft logout.

Author: Though, yes, ideally a replacement system fixes this entirely. My understanding is that we're years away from that though.

Reviewer: > Refresh tokens cause soft logout, which is the problem at hand

yeahhh, but MSC2918 also specifies a mechanism for renewing access other than sending another `/login` request.

So what I'm really saying is: rather than specifying ways to extend `/login`, why not use `/refresh` ?

Author: I'm not following. `/refresh` won't work if the token is already expired, so the client needs a new one. At that point it's not a refresh but rather replacement.

Also, not keen to add login flows to another endpoint if we want to remove that system.

Reviewer: > `/refresh` won't work if the token is already expired

that's not my understanding.

> At that point it's not a refresh but rather replacement.

`/refresh` issues you a new access token.

Reviewer: > Also, not keen to add login flows to another endpoint if we want to remove that system.

not following this. What do you mean by "add login flows to another endpoint"? and which system are we removing?

Author: while implementing refresh tokens I got "refresh token expired" far too often, so either the server-side implementation is wrong or we need to fix our reauthentication flows. 

If the intent is that refresh tokens never expire, I can certainly take a look into the underlying cause (making this MSC obsolete), though if the intent is that refresh tokens expire then we need some way of appropriately re-authenticating the user. At the moment, this is done with a `/login` request using the same device ID - if we want `/refresh` to handle re-authentication too, it'll need to understand login flows which feels nonsensical.

Reviewer: refresh tokens should never expire (unless you configure a `refresh_token_lifetime`).

I'm now realising that maybe I don't understand your usecase, though. Why are you using soft-logout in the first place?

We should probably take this elsewhere to hammer out.

If the access token is recognized by the server, the server would expose only the useful flows to
the client in the response. As explained in the MSC intro, this could be *just* password flows, or
just SSO flows, depending on how the user's account was created/linked up. The server should avoid
returning flows which will ultimately lead to a different user ID being logged in (eg: responding
with an SSO flow to a password-only account would mean that the original user ID could end up being

> overwritten if the user clicks the SSO button instead of the password form).

Reviewer 2: This sounds to me like it is just a server bug and doesn't need any spec work?

Author: The server doesn't know this happened though, hence the MSC :)

Reviewer 2: I'm not following something then! If the access token is known to the server (and the user is known to the server)...shouldn't the server already know how the user is able to log into it?

Author: Clients don't currently provide the token and aren't told they need to/should provide it.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'm not familiar enough with how soft-logout works, but it is unclear to me what is being changed by this MSC. Is an API being modified that allows for the behavior above?

Reviewer 2: Arg, GitHub didn't refresh with your comment, let me know think more about this.

Reviewer 2: > Quite simply, the client provides the now-expired access token to the `/login` endpoint

It was unclear to me that this was describing *a change* instead of the *status quo*.

I now understand that this is saying to is that the client would now provide an access token to `/login` (via headers or query parameters) which the server can use to traverse to the user (as normal) and then customize the flows, as it does for UIA already.

Author: Ah, it's under the Proposal heading so it's into the "what changed" section :D 

though I did also write this tired at midnight, so there's probably some language to fix. Will see what I can do about it.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! It might also just be me not being super familiar with soft-logout.

If the server does not recognize the access token it simply returns flows as though authentication
was not provided. This is to avoid clients having to re-submit a login request without the token,
and to discourage simple scripts which might loop through a list of acquired tokens in hopes of
finding out more about the account (like which SSO provider they signed up with).

Servers are not required to maintain knowledge of expired tokens, even if they soft logout the token.
While helpful, there are certainly valid reasons to refuse knowledge that an access token ever existed.
A server might choose to delete knowledge of an expired token after one or more specific conditions
are met though, such as:
* When a successful login with the same device ID is made (as the client will have presumably been
  able to re-authenticate appropriately).
* When the refresh token is used to get a new access token.
* After N days of being expired.

## Potential issues

Listed in proposal text.

## Alternatives

No viable alternatives known.

> 

Reviewer 3: Are those login flows actually specific to the access token? I thought they were specific to the way the user registered. As such the client could also use UIA on /login to get the flows supported for the user. This would solve getting the supported login method for the initial login as well. Currently UIA is not supported on /login, but it would solve multiple issues if it were including this one.

UIA could be as simple as a /login request with only a userid and the server returns the usual UIA response instead of this being an invalid request. Those flows should only include supported flows for that account of course. Then the client just does UIA as normal.

Author: Flows are specific to the user, but the token identifies the user.

Other MSCs can look at revamping the auth system more generally.
